# Module 01 - Introduction Javascript

## Projects
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| [fun-with-js](./projects/fun-with-js/) | The crazy ways of Javascript |

## Data types in Javascript
There are 6 data types in javascript. These are types of values - not variables. 

1. boolean - The values `true` and `false`.
2. number - All the numbers, including integers, floats, and some special numbers like `NaN`, `Infinity`
3. string - all textual values. You can use 3 different types of quotations: single quote (') , double quote (") and for special strings: back tick (`)
4. objects - a collection of key-value pairs
    - You can create an empty one like this ```var x = {}``` or ```var x = new Object()```
    - You can create a full one like this ```var x = {a: 2, b: 4}```
    - The keys must be strings or numbers and are treated as strings anyway
    - The values can be any legal javascript value
    - Arrays are also objects: 
```javascript
    var x = {0: 'Hello', 1: 'Hi'};
    var y = ['Hello', 'Hi']; 
    // essentialy the same, but the array has some additional methods - as we will see later on
```
You can access a property in two ways:
```javascript
    var x = {a: 40, b: 30};
    var y = x.a;
    var z = x['a']; // the same
    x.a = 50;
    x['a'] = 50; // the same
```
You can get a list of all keys in an object:

```javascript
    var x = {a: 50, b: 60};
    var props = Object.keys(x); // props == ['a', 'b'];
```

You can get a list of key-value pairs in an object:

```javascript
    var x = {a: 50, b: 60};
    var props = Object.entries(x); // props == [['a', 50], ['b', 60]];
```
5. Functions
You can create reusable pieces of code by creating functions.

```javascript
function doSomething() {
    console.log('We are doing something');
}

doSomething();  // called the function
```
- You can define parameters, and then pass them to the function
```javascript
function addAndPrint(num) {
    var txt = `${num} + 5 = ${num + 5}`;
    console.log(txt);
}

addAndPrint(10);
addAndPrint(20);
```

* Functions can return values
```javascript
function double(num) {
    return num * 2;
}

var x = double(10); // x == 20

```

6. undefined - this type contains only the value `undefined`. It is the default value of everything that was not initialized.

```javascript
var x; // x == undefined
console.log(z); // will print undefined

```

## Variables in javascript
Variables are places in memory that holds values. In javascript, you define a variable using the `var` keyword, and then it can store any legal value in javascript: boolean, number, string, object, function or undefined;

```javascript
var x;  // initialized to undefined
var y = 40; // y is a variable that holds a number
```

### Variables do not have type
Variables can hold **any** value, and you can use the same variable to store different value types. A variable that stores a number, can later be assigned a string, or even a full object.

```javascript
var x = 10;
x = 'Hello';
x = {a: 20, b: 'Hello'}
```

### Reference and Value types
The 6 types of javascript are divided into two groups: value types, and reference types.

> boolean, number, string, and undefined are **value types**
> object, function are **reference types**

When you assign value from one variable to another:
- If it is a value type, the value is copied - duplicated
- If it is a reference type, the two variables point to the same object.

```javascript
var x = 10;
var y = x; // y is also 10, but it is a different 10. These are two different instances of 10.

x++; // x is now 11, y is still 10.
```

``` javascript
var x = {a: 20};
var y = x;  // there is only one object in memory with a: 20. both x and y point to the same object.

x.a = 30;   // y.a is also 30, because they both point to the same object, which has changed

```

## Arrays and Loops in Javascript
We can create arrays using the [] operator or with `new Array()`. 

```javascript
var a = [1, 2, 3];
var b = new Array();
```

Arrays are just objects, where the keys are auto-generated by javascript.

But in addition, array objects allow us a few operations that "normal" objects do not.
* We can query the length using the `length` property:
```javascript
var a = [1, 2, 3];
console.log(a.length);
```

* We can add elements to the end using the `push` operator:
```javascript
var a = [1, 2, 3];
a.push(4);
```
* We can remove and return the last element using the `pop` method
```javascript
var a = [1, 2, 3];
var x = a.pop(); // x == 3, a == [1, 2]
```
* We can remove and return the **first** item using the `shift` method
```javascript
var a = [1, 2, 3];
var x = a.shift(); // x == 1, a == [2, 3]
```
* We can add item at the beginning using `unshift`
```javascript
var a = [1, 2, 3];
a.unshift(0); // a = [0, 1, 2, 3]
```

* For more fined control you can use the `splice` method. The `splice` method gets the following parameters: `(start, deleteCount, item1, item2, ...). It starts at the provided index, removes the requested number of items, and then inserts the provided items in their place. Finally it returns the deleted items
```javascript
    var a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    var x = a.splice(2, 2, 10, 20); // a == [1, 2, 10, 20, 5], x == [3, 4]
```

* The `reverse` method, reverses the array

```javascript
    var a = [1, 2, 3];
    a.reverse(); // [3, 2, 1]
```

### Looping over arrays
You can use the `for` loops to generate and modify an index. Instead, you can use the `for-of` to loop over items of an array

```javascript
var a = [1, 2, 3];
for(var x of a) {
    console.log(x); 
}
```


## The 'new' keyword - It's not what you think
* There are no classes in Javascript... The word `new` comes from Object Oriented Programming, what is it doing in JS?
* `new` creates a new Object
* It also runs a function
* `new bla()` - runs the `bla` function, but before, it creates a new object.
* **EVERY** function can be called with new. 
* The object that was created, "remembers" the function that created it. 
* The function that created it becomes it's "constructor".
* So EVERY function can be called, either with or without the word `new`
* Can a constructor have access to the object that was created?
    * Yes, using the `this` keyword

```javascript
function Person(name) {
    var words = name.split(' ');
    this.firstName = words[0];
    this.lastName = words[1];
}
```

* But hold on... We can call every function WITHOUT the word `new` as well... 

* So what happens in this code:
```javascript
var p = Person('John Smith');
```


## Functional Programming in Javascript
### Functions are values
- Functions are first class values in Javascript
- Variables can point to functions

```javascript
var timesTwo = function(x) {
    return x * 2;
}
```
> In this example, `timesTwo` is a **variable** that points to an **anonymous function**.

- You can then invoke the function using the variable name
```javascript
var x = timesTwo(10) // returns 20
```

### Lambda Expressions
- You can reduce the amount of boilerplate code by using **lambda expression** notation
```javascript
var timesTwo = i => i * 2;
```
> This code is identical to the previous declaration of `timesTwo`

### Higher order funtions
- Just like you can create objects, arrays, or strings inside functions, you can also create inner functions

```javascript
function createMultiplier(n) {
    var func = x => x * n;
}
```
> In this code, `func` is an inner function that is created when the outer function is called

- The inner functions can access values defined by the outer function (`n` in this example)

- The outer function can also **return** the function it has created so it can be used outside

```javascript
function createMultiplier(n) {
    var func = x => x * n;
    return func
}

var timesTwo = createMultiplier(2);
var six = timesTwo(3);
```

- Functions can also receive functions as parameters.
- Functions that either receive functions, or return functions or both, are called **Higher Order Functions**



        


